[RELAXING MUSIC]
[HEART BEATING]
>> Sometimes, we have
an inner knowing,
a sense of clarity
that just feels right.
It is often just a delicate,
quiet, or easy feeling
that offers direct
perception, answers
that seem to come, at
times, out of nowhere,
or a very tangible feeling about
what you should or should not
do.
In essence, this is what many
people call their intuition.
These intuitive feelings show
up in most people's lives
from time to time, random
events that we remember
as special in some way.
[RAIN FALLING]
Perhaps, right now, you
can remember some intuitive
experiences in your life.
What if intuition need not
be so random and fleeting?
What if we could make
practical intuition
a normal part of our lives,
something that we can access
more often and more easily?
With a little practice, we can.
Heart intelligence, heart
coherence, and intuition
are linked and work together.
Practicing to increase
heart coherence
a few minutes,
several times a day,
can help you to be more
intuitive at choice
points, helping you to choose
your actions and reactions,
rather than mechanically
respond in the same old
stress-producing
behavior patterns.
Here are some
practical situations
where accessing heart
intuition can be very helpful--
when you have a big
decision to make,
or you are having a
hard time figuring out
something, increasing
your capacity
for discerning direction
in sensitive situations,
deciding when it is
time to speak up,
or when it is time to hold back,
determining what attitude you
should bring to a
particular situation,
detecting when life
is feeding back to us
that we need to
change an attitude
or disposition, to help guide
your diet and health choices.
>> Intuition has always played
out in business that people
don't actually talk about it.
But I have noticed, over the
last 10 years, intuition,
which was nowhere in leadership
competence in any situation,
now, in organizations,
where they
have a set of
leadership competencies,
intuition is there.
And I think, we're in a
time in the business world,
where people are much
more comfortable to talk
about a partnership
between head and heart.
Businesses have
always used heart
to make decisions
as well as head.
And I see, very clearly now,
a resurgence of a willingness
to talk about the importance
of intuitive heart decisions
in the business world.
[HEART BEATING]
>> Here is a tool called the
freeze-frame technique that can
help you access more of your
heart's intuitive intelligence.
It's a multi-purpose technique
for stopping energy drains
from mentally and emotionally
processing a problem,
and then gaining clarity
or insight from the heart's
intuitive guidance as a
more effective approach.
It works by shifting
your physiology
into a coherent state to
synchronize heart and brain,
then asking yourself questions
to access your heart's
intuitive guidance,
your heart intelligence.
For this experience,
I would like
you to get a pen and paper.
It will be useful
for this exercise.
There's no rush.
Pause the program if needed.
OK, I'd like you to think
of a specific situation
that you feel has been difficult
to solve these past few days.
Try not to pick the most
emotionally-charged situation
in your life to start with.
Pick something where
you'd like to know
your next steps from your
heart's intuitive guidance.
Write down a few words
about the situation.
And under that,
write down how you
have been mentally and
emotionally feeling
about the situation.
Now, as you have
done before, focus
on the area around your heart.
Keep your attention
there as you breathe
in a comfortable rhythm.
Imagine your breath is flowing
in and out of your heart area.
Make a sincere
attempt to experience
a regenerative feeling,
such as appreciation
or care for someone or
something in your life.
Remember, don't try to
simply visualize it,
but rather to feel it
fully, reexperience it.
Now, ask a question
from the heart.
From this more
objective place, ask
yourself, what would be a
more efficient or effective
attitude, action, or solution?
Listen to the response
of your heart.
Quietly observe any subtle
changes in perceptions,
attitudes, or feelings.
Write down what your
heart's intuitive guidance
offered you, even if
it's just one or two
words or a simple attitude shift
that your heart is suggesting,
as this can lead
to new solutions.
Commit to sustaining
beneficial attitude shifts
and acting on new insights.
Now, read what you first
wrote down, and then read
your heart's response,
which is more intelligent.
We suggest you do the
freeze-frame technique
in writing until you
get comfortable with it.
And then you can use it
more casually to help
you gain the intuitive
discrimination you
need for making
choices and decisions.
It will work for you
if you work with it.
Here are the quick steps
of this technique--
acknowledge,
heart-focused breathing,
activate a positive or renewing
feeling, ask, observe and act.
>> The major benefit that
freeze-frame gives me is when
things are going
all over the place,
and things are going wrong,
we're in this emotional
turmoil.
And the biggest component
around the freeze-frame
is to shift to that
coherent state.
And when you're in that
position, that allows you
this deeper wisdom, this
perspective, which, at the very
least, just calms your nerves,
though, at a lot of the times,
I've been able to really access
some deep, profound insights
on what to do next.
>> It's my favorite because
it really embraces, I think,
the essence of what
HeartMath is about.
So it allows us to get
into a more coherent state,
physiologically speaking.
So we're sending a different
coherent signal to the brain.
But it also has, then, a
step where we ask our heart
for its intuitive guidance.
So now, we're accessing
that larger part of ourself
to get that flow of
intuitive information
from that larger
part of ourself.
That often brings in solutions
for out-of-the-box thinking.
So I use this all the
time, scientifically,
when I'm writing a paper or
having to design a new study.
It's a wonderful
technique for really
being able to access that deeper
part of ourself, that deeper
wisdom that we have.
>> So I love this technique
because of how useful it is
and what it gives you.
And it's really a combination
of the physiology,
the emotional
qualities of the heart,
and then the intuitive
access that that gives you.
So if I have to
make a big decision,
sure, I'm going to use the
logic, linear intelligence.
I'm going to use what I know
from the past, what my life
experience has shown me.
All those things
are important too.
But I'm also going to
get a second opinion.
I'm going to consult
with my heart.
And I'm going to take
all that information,
and put it together, and use
that to make the decision.
It doesn't mean you
always get it right.
But it makes me feel good
that I did the best I
could to get it right.
>> The freeze-frame technique
is not just for problems.
It's also helpful for gaining
clarity and new insight
on creative projects.
Can you imagine being the
best version of yourself?
Practicing the techniques
you are learning
can offer a life with more
flow and less resistance.
>> Now, can you picture how the
world would look if many of us
applied these easy exercises,
if we could all manage
our emotions and learn to be
in control of our reactions,
if we listened carefully to
our heart as well as our mind,
taking the best decisions
available and saving
our energies for the
experiences we want,
allowing ourselves to feel
the things that renew us,
regenerate us, give
meaning to our lives?
Well, that's exactly where we're
heading in the next chapter.